In this lesson I want to talk to you a little bit more about cleaning data.
We've already gathered all our data and we've started on this process.
In particular what we've done so far is we've extracted the relevant data namely the e-mail bodies from
all our text files and we've also converted all the text files into a pandas data frame.
In other words we've taken over 5000 different files we've extracted the actual pieces of data that
we need from it and we've converted all of that into a format that we can work with in our Python code.
Now it's time for the next steps namely checking for empty emails checking for missing values or no
values in our data that we've imported into our Python notebook.
So without further ado let me show you how to do that.
In Jupiter notebook I'm going to add another markdown cell right here that reads data cleaning checking
for missing values.
Of course it would help if I could spell a bit better.
But there we go.
The handy thing is that we've put all our data into a panda's data frame.
The first thing I want to do is check if any message bodies are equal to not by no I mean that the value
is missing.
The way I can access a particular column in my data frame and namely the messages column is for writing
data dot message.
This will access my message column which looks like so the alternative syntax that you'll see to accomplish
the exact same thing is with the square brackets and then the actual column name between single quotes.
So that reads message.
Great.
Now there are five thousand eight hundred rows in this column.
So if I wanted to check if any of them has a missing value then I can use the method is not what we
get in this case is a value true or false based on whether or not any particular value was null or not.
Now this is a very very handy method but it doesn't help me check if any of these values is equal to
null.
I mean part of the reason is is that yes I can scroll through here.
But Jupiter will actually only display so many rows it will hide the middle part of my data frame.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to chain some more methods.
The first one is this values attribute.
And what this will do is instead of giving me the index name and the value here it will just give me
num pi array.
It will just give me the values without the index.
The nice thing about this is that if I wanted to check if any of the five thousand eight hundred rows
has a missing value I can use the any method and chain that onto here and get my result.
So the good news for us is that the result is false.
We have no missing values in our message column now missing values are actually not the same thing as
empty emails write an empty email would be something like this an empty string if I check what this
is I will actually see that is of type String.
This would simply be an empty string a string of length zero so what would be an example of a missing
value say I had a variable called My var and we don't want to put any value inside this variable we
simply want it to be empty or contain nothing.
How would we accomplish this in Python.
Now you might think that given that we've used is null as a method on our data frame you could simply
write something like My var is equal to normal and create your empty variable.
However even though there's no keyword is commonly used in other programming languages like say Java
in python there is another keyword that has the same meaning.
And this is the keyword none.
And you can see that Jupiter notebook is instantly picking up the fact that this is a keyword with the
syntax highlighting.
So in this case if I was to check the type of my variable
I would see that it is indeed a non type.
My underscore var is truly empty.
It truly contains nothing.
How conceptually.
The way I like to remember this difference between zero or an empty string with a null value is with
this picture.
The Internet has truly blessed us with thoughts of terrible programming jokes and I'm going to do my
best to share them with you.
But in all seriousness this is actually quite a helpful way about thinking about null values or non
values as they're known in Python.
Okay so even though that we've established that there's no entry in our message column with the value
null or none it doesn't mean that we don't have empty emails that could be in our dataset.
Okay so let me show you how we would write a check for discovering if there are any strings of length
zero in this entire message column in our data frame.
Add a little comment to him that reads check if there are empty emails say string length zero.
The way I would go about doing this is grabbing our data frame then grabbing the message column then
converting that to a string and then grabbing the length of these strings.
Let's take a look at what this looks like.
Here you can see how many characters each email body has in our messages column.
Now if we wanted to check if any of them are equal to zero.
In other words if any of them look like this we can simply use the double equal sign and then zero for
the logical test.
If I press shift enter now we again get an entire column of true or false values.
All right.
We can't look through five thousand eight hundred different messages so that any method is our best
friend again to see if there are any rows where the value is equal to true instead of false.
Take a look.
Huh.
So there are some empty emails somewhere in our data frame.
What we don't know yet is how many of these rows have a string length of zero.
So how it would check that.
Well we could take our logical test here.
Remember this returned five thousand eight hundred entries of true or false.
Now the Boolean value of false is equated with the numerical value of 0 and the Boolean value of true
equates to the value 1.
So if we wanted to know how many rows have a string length of 0 0 we would have to do is some them up.
This sums up all the zeros and any ones any true values in the five thousand and eight hundred entries
okay.
So we're going deeper down the rabbit hole.
We now know that among the five thousand and eight hundred entries there are four strings of length
zero how we have to find out where in our enormous data frame these strings are.
We have to find the rows that contain these empty strings.
But before we do that I want to pose a challenge to you.
Namely I'd like you to pause the video and write the python code that would check for the number of
entries with null or none values.
Did you solve it.
Here's the solution.
Now I know we don't have any null values in this data frame but that doesn't mean that your future projects
won't be having this issue.
So with data don't message we can pull up our message column and then with is null we can find out if
there are any null values.
And by summing up all the true and false values that we get out of this bit of code here we can find
out the number of null values.
The answer of zero shouldn't be surprising because we've already established that there are no null
values in the message column.
But I do think that this is quite an important piece of the data cleaning workflow so it's good to have
this down and practice this once or twice.
Let me add some more empty cells here.
Now I'll add a markdown cell and what I'll do here is I'll just write locate empty e-mails.
Let's find out the euro names of our empty emails.
As you can probably guess this condition is gonna be key.
This is what we're going to be using to get a pandas series of true or false values for where these
rows are empty.
Now if I wanted to pull out the index names for where these empty values are then I could select based
on this criteria where these values are true from our data frame and then access the index attribute
from the data frame.
So data square brackets and then put the logical condition in here and then have dot index afterwards.
And now we'll get the index names.
The row names for where this condition is true.
Check it out.
OK so this is interesting right.
CMBS CMBS CMBS and then dot D as I'm the school store.
These are the index names now.
Does anything strike you as odd with these index names.
Let's see how they compare to all the other file names.
So just scrolling through our data set here we can see that most of these emails actually have file
names that looks something like this the CMBS and DS store as a file name does seem to be a little bit
odd.
Let's see if we can find out what these files are.
If I go to my spam underscore one folder and a squirrel all the way down then I indeed see one of these
files here.
This actually does not seem to be an email right.
Taking a look at this file here in my atom text editor I can see that it looks like this.
This is definitely not part of our dataset.
This the s file is actually a system file that you'll see both on Windows and Mac when you unzip the
original email archive.
This is not an email file that we should include in our data frame.
You'll also find this CMBS file in the spam underscore to folder and in the easy underscore ham underscore
one folder now what about this dot.
D.S. on the school store file now because the file name is preceded by a full stop by a dot.
This D.S. underscores stole file is actually a hidden file.
This is a Mac OS specific file that stores the attributes of a particular folder and this system file
was created when I downloaded unzipped and then reset the course materials.
In other words this is not an email.
This is an artifact of me preparing the lesson resources for you.
Now obviously we don't want any of these four files in our data frame.
We just want our email data.
But why are these files in our data frame in the first place.
If we don't want them there.
What what happened.
Well let's take a look at our file reading function.
Looking at the e-mail body generator code and this walk function from the OS library we can see that
this function actually picks up all the files in a particular folder.
And this includes the system files that don't belong in the e-mail Corpus.
That's how they got included in the data frame.
Now we know their own names are index names for undesirables in our data frame.
But what we don't know yet is where they are now.
Let me show you how to get the location for this dot D.S. on the school store entry.
What we can do with our data frame is get the index.
So index dot
underscore location get location o see parentheses and then single quotes and then dot D's on a school
store in the single quotes will give us the row number where this entry lives so we can search the entire
index.
So all the names for a particular name which is our argument in the set location method here.
Let's take a look.
So here we have it four thousand six hundred nine is where this entry is in our data frame if I say
data square brackets say four thousand six hundred and eight to four thousand six hundred and I don't
know eleven that I can pull up this section of the data frame and take a look at which roads precede
and follow this D.S. underscore store entry and there we can see it just happily living between two
non spam emails in the next lesson I'll show you how to remove these system files from our data frame
I'll show you how to drop these entries and clean things up with a limit and much much more I'll see
you there.